Great moderation at the firm level?
Unconditional versus conditional output volatility
Claudia M. Buch
(University of Tübingen and IAW)

Jörg Döpke
(University of Applied Sciences, Merseburg)

Kerstin Stahn
(Deutsche Bundesbank)

Discussion Paper
Series 1: Economic Studies
No 13/2008
Discussion Papers represent the authors’ personal opinions and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Deutsche Bundesbank or its staff.

Editorial Board:

Heinz Herrmann
Thilo Liebig
Karl-Heinz Tödter

Deutsche Bundesbank, Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main,
Postfach 10 06 02, 60006 Frankfurt am Main
Tel +49 69 9566-1
Telex within Germany 41227, telex from abroad 414431
Please address all orders in writing to: Deutsche Bundesbank,
Press and Public Relations Division, at the above address or via fax +49 69 9566-3077
Internet http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISBN 978-3–86558–435–9 (Printversion)
ISBN 978-3–86558–436–6 (Internetversion)

Abstract
Aggregated output in industrialized countries has become less volatile over the past
decades. Whether this “Great Moderation” can be found in firm level data as well
remains disputed. We study the evolution of firm level output volatility using a
balanced panel dataset on German firms that covers 35 years (1971-2005) and about
1,500 firms per year. In contrast to earlier work using firm level data, we use the
multifactor residual model proposed by Pesaran (2006) to isolate the idiosyncratic
component of firms’ real sales growth from macroeconomic developments. Our paper
has three main findings. First, time trends in unconditional firm level and aggregated
output volatility in Germany are similar. There has been a long-run downward trend,
which was interrupted by the unification period. Second, the conditional, idiosyncratic
firm level volatility does not exhibit a downward trend. If anything idiosyncratic
volatility has been on a slow trend rise. Third, we find evidence of a positive link
between growth and volatility at the firm level.

Keywords:

firm level volatility, Great Moderation, multifactor residual
model

JEL-Classification:

E32, D21

Non-technical summary
Aggregated output has become less volatile over the past decades in industrialized
countries. While this stylized fact is widely accepted, the causes for the “Great
Moderation” are still the subject of lively debate. The jury is still out on the question
whether “Good Policy”, in particular a more stabilizing monetary policy, or “Good
Luck”, i.e. the absence of major shocks, is the main cause of the Great Moderation.
Yet, for individual households, it is the development of volatility at the firm level
rather than the development of aggregate volatility that matters. If firm level volatility
increases, households must find ways to diversify firm level risks and to shield their
consumption against income fluctuation. Possibilities for diversification, in turn, depend
on the relative importance of macroeconomic and idiosyncratic factors affecting
volatility at the firm level. Idiosyncratic volatility can be diversified in developed
financial markets. Macroeconomic factors, in contrast, affect all firms in a similar
manner and can be diversified nationally only to the extent that some firms react
differently to the same macroeconomic shock.
In this paper, we thus test whether evidence of a Great Moderation can be found at
the firm level. Earlier evidence, which mostly uses US data, has partly conflicting
results. In fact, the link between aggregated and firm level volatility is not clear a priori.
On the one hand, developments of growth volatility at the aggregate and the firm level
might differ if output changes are imperfectly correlated across firms and if these
correlations change over time. On the other hand, aggregate growth rates of GDP can be
seen as the averaged growth rates across all firms in an economy. This makes
differences in the time series patterns of firm level and aggregated volatility unlikely.
Instead, volatility at different levels of aggregation moves into the same direction if the
shares of firms in aggregated output and the responses of firms to macroeconomic
developments remain relatively stable.
In this paper, we go beyond earlier studies by using a comprehensive panel dataset
for German firms. These data allow tracking individual firms for a maximum of 35
years (1971-2005). Our data come from the Corporate Balance Sheet Statistics and the
Financial Statements Data Pool provided by the Deutsche Bundesbank.

Methodologically, we go beyond earlier literature in two regards. First, we use the
multifactor residual model proposed by Pesaran (2006) to isolate the idiosyncratic
growth of firms’ sales from macroeconomic factors. We control for observed and
unobserved macroeconomic developments affecting all firms while allowing for a
heterogeneous response of firms to these factors. We find that trends in firm level and
aggregate volatility are similar when looking at the unconditional volatility at the firm
level. Controlling for macroeconomic developments, firm level volatility is not only
lower but also exhibits no downward trend. If anything, there even is some evidence of
a very slow increase in idiosyncratic firm level volatility. Second, we employ panel
regressions to analyze the determinants of firm level growth volatility. Results show
that higher asset growth and lower inventory-sales ratios are associated with a higher
volatility of firms’ sales.

Nicht-technische Zusammenfassung
Schwankungen des aggregierten Output haben in entwickelten Volkswirtschaften über
die vergangenen Jahrzehnte hinweg abgenommen. Die Ursachen für diese „Great
Moderation” werden in der Literatur strittig diskutiert. Sowohl eine bessere Geldpolitik
als auch geringere makroökonomische Schocks und strukturelle Veränderungen werden
für diese Entwicklung verantwortlich gemacht.
Für individuelle Haushalte ist hingegen eher die Entwicklung auf Firmen- als auf
Makroebene relevant. Steigt die Volatilität auf Firmenebene, müssen die Haushalte
Wege finden, diese Volatilität zu diversifizieren, um ihren Konsum gegen
Schwankungen des Einkommen abzusichern. Inwiefern das möglich ist, hängt
wiederum von den Bestimmungsründen der einzelwirtschaftlichen Volatilität ab. Stehen
makroökonomische Entwicklungen hinter den Schwankungen auf Firmenebene, kann
eine Absicherung von Risiken im nationalen Rahmen nur begrenzt gelingen. Sind
idiosynkratische, firmenspezifische Schocks ausschlaggebend, besteht hingegen die
Möglichkeit zur Diversifizierung auf nationalen Finanzmärkten.
In diesem Papier untersuchen wir, inwiefern auf Firmenebene ein Rückgang der
Volatilität zu verzeichnen ist. Frühere Evidenz, die sich vorwiegend auf die USA
bezieht, kommt hier zu widersprüchlichen Aussagen: Grundsätzlich ist der
Zusammenhang zwischen der Volatilität auf aggregierter und auf Firmenebene nicht
eindeutig. Einerseits können sich die Entwicklungen unterscheiden, wenn die
Wachstumsraten auf Firmenebene unvollständig miteinander korreliert sind und sich
diese Korrelationen über die Zeit ändern. Andererseits kann das Wachstum auf
aggregierter Ebene als der gewichtete Durchschnitt der Wachstumsraten auf Firmebene
aufgefasst werden. Bleiben die Anteile einzelner Firmen über die Zeit hinweg konstant
und reagieren die Firmen ähnlich auf makroökonomische Entwicklungen, sollte sich
somit die Entwicklung der Volatilität auf unterschiedlichen Aggregationsebenen nicht
wesentlich unterscheiden.
In diesem Papier nutzen wir Daten für eine repräsentative Gruppe deutscher Firmen.
Unsere Daten erlauben es, eine Gruppe von rund 1.500 Unternehmen über einen
Zeitraum von 35 Jahren (1971-2005) kontinuierlich zu verfolgen. Unsere Daten sind der

Unternehmensbilanzstatistik

und

dem

Jahresabschlussdatenpool

der

Deutschen

Bundesbank entnommen.
In methodischer Hinsicht gehen wir über frühere Arbeiten hinaus, indem wir das
Multifaktormodell von Pesaran (2006) nutzen, um die idiosynkratische Komponente des
Wachstums auf Firmenebene von makroökonomischen Faktoren zu isolieren. Wir
berücksichtigen beobachtete und unbeobachtete makroökonomische Faktoren und wir
lassen eine heterogene Reaktion der Unternehmen auf diese Faktoren zu. Unsere
Ergebnisse zeigen, dass Trends in der firmenspezifischen und der aggregierten
Volatilität ähnlich sind, wenn nicht um makroökonomische Faktoren bereinigt wird.
Nachdem wir makroökonomische Faktoren herausgerechnet haben, findet sich
allerdings kein starker Trend mehr in der firmen-spezifischen Volatilität: wenn
überhaupt, hat diese über die Zeit hinweg leicht zugenommen. Gleichzeitig zeigen diese
Ergebnisse, dass makroökonomische Faktoren einen starken Einfluss auf die
Entwicklungen auf Firmenebene haben. In einem zweiten Schritt untersuchen wir die
Determinanten

der

firmenspezifischen

Volatilität.

Höheres

Wachstum

auf

Unternehmensebene und geringere Lagerhaltung gehen diesen Berechnungen zufolge
mit einer stärkeren Volatilität einher.

Contents
1

Introduction ..............................................................................................................1

2

Theoretical Background .......................................................................................... 4

3

Data and Descriptive Statistics .................................................................................6
3.1 The Data .................................................................................................................6
3.2 Computing Firm Level Volatility...........................................................................9

4

Computing Idiosyncratic Firm Level Volatility .....................................................10

5

Decomposing and Explaining Firm Level Volatility .............................................13
5.1 First-Stage Regression: Decomposing Firm Level Volatility ..............................13
5.2 Second-Stage Regressions: Explaining the Volatility of Sales Growth ...............16
5.3 Robustness and Selection Issues ..........................................................................18

6

Summary and Conclusions .....................................................................................21

7

References ..............................................................................................................22

8

Data Appendix........................................................................................................25

List of tables and figures
Table 1: Distribution of Firms by Sector and Year .........................................................26
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics and Correlation Matrix ...................................................28
Table 3: Firm Level Response to Macroeconomic Factors.............................................31
Table 4: Determinants of Firm Level Volatility of Real Sales........................................32
Table 5: Regression Results Heteroskedastic Regression Model....................................34
Graph 1: Unconditional Firm Level Versus Aggregated Volatility ................................35
Graph 2: Conditional Versus Unconditional Firm Level Volatility................................36

Great Moderation at the Firm Level?
Unconditional versus Conditional Output Volatility *

1 Introduction
Aggregated output has become less volatile over the past decades in industrialized
countries (see, among others, Blanchard and Simon 2001, Stock and Watson 2003).
While this stylized fact is widely accepted, the causes for the “Great Moderation” are
still the subject of lively debate. The jury is still out on the question whether “Good
Policy”, in particular a more stabilizing monetary policy, or “Good Luck”, i.e. the
absence of major shocks, is the main cause of the Great Moderation. (For recent
contributions, see Benati 2007, Benati and Surico 2006, Canova 2006, or Giannone et
al. 2007.)
Yet, for individual households, it is the development of volatility at the firm level
rather than the development of aggregate volatility that matters. If firm level volatility
increases, households must find ways to diversify firm level risks and to shield their
consumption against income fluctuation. Possibilities for diversification, in turn, depend
on the relative importance of macroeconomic and idiosyncratic factors affecting
volatility at the firm level. Idiosyncratic volatility can be diversified in developed
financial markets. Macroeconomic factors, in contrast, affect all firms in a similar
manner and can be diversified nationally only to the extent that some firms react
differently to the same macroeconomic shock. In this paper, we thus test whether
evidence of a Great Moderation can be found at the firm level.

*

Corresponding author: Claudia M. Buch (University Tübingen, Department of Economics, Mohlstrasse
36, 72074 Tübingen, Phone: +49 7071 2972962, claudia.buch@uni-tuebingen.de). The authors thank
the Statistics Department of the Deutsche Bundesbank and, in particular, Timm Körting, for excellent
data assistance and discussions on the data. We would also like to thank Jörg Breitung, Heinz
Herrmann, Thomas Phillipon as well as seminar participants at the University of Osnabrück and at the
Annual Meeting of the Council for Monetary Economics of the German Economic Association, held at
the Austrian National Bank in February 2008, for most helpful discussions and comments. The views
presented in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the
Deutsche Bundesbank. All errors and inconsistencies are solely our own responsibility.

1

To date, there is little consensus reached how firm level output volatility has evolved
over time, let alone the causes for changes in this volatility. For the USA, Comin and
Philippon (2005) were the first to claim diverging patterns in firm level and aggregated
output volatility. According to their results, firm level output volatility has increased,
whereas aggregated output volatility has decreased (see also Comin and Mulani 2006).
Comin et al. (2006) confirm these general patterns in the data and show that output and
employment volatility display similar trends. Yet Davis et al. (2006) demonstrate that
the finding of an increase in firm level output volatility crucially depends on the sample
of firms chosen. According to their results, the increase in firm level volatility is a
feature of large, publicly traded firms. Using information on privately-owned firms as
well, Davis et al. (2006) find a downward trend in firm level volatility for the US,
mirroring the macro level development.
Evidence on firm level volatility for non-US countries is scarce (Davis and Kahn
2007). For France, Thesmar and Thoenig (2004) show an upward trend in firm level
volatility. For Germany, patterns at the firm level are similar to those found in
aggregated data, and there is no evidence of an increase in volatility (Buch et al. 2006). 1
In this paper, we go beyond earlier studies by using a comprehensive panel dataset
for German firms. These data allow tracking individual firms for a maximum of 35
years (1971-2005). Our data come from the Financial Statements Data Pool and the
Corporate Balance Sheet Statistics of German firms provided by the Deutsche
Bundesbank.
Methodologically, we depart from earlier literature in two regards. First, we use the
multifactor residual model proposed by Pesaran (2006) to isolate the idiosyncratic
growth of firms’ sales from macroeconomic factors. We control for observed and
unobserved macroeconomic developments affecting all firms while allowing for a
heterogeneous response of firms to these factors. Our results show that differences
between the unconditional volatility of firms’ sales growth and the idiosyncratic,
conditional volatility are quite substantial. Without distinguishing the micro- and the
macro-component, inference about trends in firm level versus aggregate volatility might
thus be misleading. Second, we employ fixed effects panel regressions as well as the
1

For evidence on aggregated volatility in Germany see Aßmann et al. (2006) and Buch et al. (2004).

2

heteroskedastic regression model proposed by Harvey (1976) to analyze the
determinants of firm level growth volatility. This method has the advantage that we can
simultaneously estimate the determinants of the mean and the variance of firms’ sales
growth. Moreover, our results do not rely on arbitrary choices of choosing a time
window for the computation of (rolling) volatilities.
Why would one expect firm level and aggregated volatility to differ? After all,
aggregate growth rates of GDP can be seen as the averaged growth rates across all firms
in an economy. Yet, this does not automatically imply that the same trends as in the
volatility of GDP growth can be found in firm level data. Instead, developments of
growth volatility at the aggregate level and the firm level might differ if output changes
are imperfectly correlated across firms (Comin and Phillipon 2005). Patterns of
correlation, in turn, may change due to differences in the process of deregulation across
sectors, differences in R&D intensities, or different degrees of goods market
competition. Also, advancing financial markets provide better opportunities for risksharing, which increases the ability of investors to take on risks. Depending on the
degree of information asymmetries at the firm level, different firms might be affected
differently. These arguments suggest that studying the development of aggregated
volatility only may mask diverging trends at the firm level.
Davis et al. (2006), in contrast, argue that differences in the time series patterns of
firm level and aggregated volatility are unlikely. They argue that volatility at different
level of aggregation moves into the same direction if the shares of firms in aggregated
output and the responses of firms to macroeconomic developments remain relatively
stable.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Part 2, we provide a brief theoretical
background. In Parts 3 and 4, we describe our data and our empirical model. In Part 5,
we use this model to decompose firms’ growth rates into the idiosyncratic component
and the component driven by macroeconomic factors, and we analyze the determinants
of firm level growth volatility. Part 6 concludes. We find that trends in firm level and
aggregate volatility are similar when looking at the unconditional volatility at the firm
level. This supports the view of Davis et al. (2006). Controlling for macroeconomic
developments, we find that firm level volatility is not only lower but also exhibits no

3

downward trend. In fact, there even is some evidence of a very slow increase in
idiosyncratic firm level volatility, supporting the view of Comin and Phillipon (2005).
We also investigate the determinants of idiosyncratic volatility and find higher asset
growth and lower inventory-sales ratios to be associated with a higher volatility of
firms’ sales. Leverage has no significant impact.

2 Theoretical Background
In order to understand how firm level and aggregate volatility develop – and why
time trends might differ – a theoretical framework which departs from the assumption
of symmetric, homogenous firms is required. Using a standard Dixit-Stiglitz-type
specification of household preferences, it can be shown that firm level prices and output
depend on firm level and macroeconomic factors alike. As shown in Woodford (2003:
Chapter 3), the first-order condition for the optimal pricing strategy of the supplier of
good i is then given by:



31 pt i , ptI , Pt ;Yt , [ t , [ it



0

(1)

where 31 is the first derivative of the firm i’s profit function, pt i  is the price
charged for good i, ptI is an index of the price charged in industry I to which firm i
belongs, Pt is the economy-wide price index, Yt is an index of aggregate demand, [ t is
a vector of exogenous macroeconomic disturbances, and [ it is a vector of firm-specific
disturbances. According to equation (1), a firm’s profit maximum with the
corresponding prices and quantities depends on firm-specific, industry-specific, and
macroeconomic developments. These variables, by definition, also have an impact on
the volatility of firm level variables.
Equation (1) also implies that trends in the volatility of firm-specific and
macroeconomic factors might differ if [ t and [ it exhibit different time trends or if the
propagation channels between micro- and macroeconomic developments change
systematically over time. Focusing on the micro-economic determinants of firm level
volatility, we can think of four main reasons why volatility may change over time.

4

First, the process of financial market deregulation and integration may provide better
risk-sharing possibilities for investors. Hence, ceteris paribus, more risky firms may be
able to obtain external finance, thus raising the average risk and volatility of firms.
Thesmar and Thoenig (2004) find evidence for France supporting the hypothesis that
the financial market deregulation has contributed to an increase in firm level output
volatility. We will account for the importance of financial frictions by including the
leverage ratio of firms.
Second, greater exposure to international competition and the deregulation of product
markets may increase the elasticity of demand that firms are facing. This could change
the responsiveness of firms to a given shock. 2
Third, changes in the process of productivity growth away from the imitation of
existing technologies towards innovative research and development may increase
volatility. Eichengreen (2007), for instance, notes that, up until roughly the 1970s,
growth in Europe was characterized by a catching up process to the technological
frontier whereas in later decades innovative R&D started to dominate.
Fourth, new information technologies have helped firms to improve their inventory
management. During the “Great Moderation”, output volatility fell further than final
sales volatility (Davis and Kahn 2007). This implies a change in the behavior of
inventories in terms of lower volatility of inventories and/or a change in the covariance
between inventories and sales. In our empirical analysis below, we will look at the
volatility of real sales rather than output. From a theoretical point of view, we would
expect inventories to be used to smoothen production when shocks to firms’ sales
dominate (Hornstein 1998). If productivity shocks dominate, in contrast, inventories are
used to stabilize sales. Hence, we use firm level information on the inventory-sales ratio
to account for the fact that inventories should be adjusted counter-cyclically with regard
to fluctuations in real sales.
Our data are not rich enough to study the importance of all of these factors. However,
we will show trends in the data and model the determinants of volatility as closely as

2

See Rodrik (1997) for a related argument as to why labor market volatility may increase in integrated
markets.

5

possible to the above hypotheses. Our focus is on isolating micro factors and macro
factors contributing to changes in firm level volatility.

3 Data and Descriptive Statistics
3.1 The Data
To document long-run trends in firm level volatility, we exploit, for the first time, a
new firm level dataset that links two datasets available at the Deutsche Bundesbank: the
Corporate Balance Sheets Statistics (Unternehmensbilanzstatistik), which covers the
period

from

1971

to

1996,

and

the

Financial

Statements

Data

Pool

(Jahresabschlussdatenpool), which starts in 1997. (For methodological changes, see
Deutsche Bundesbank (2005, 2006).) Earlier research was restricted to either of these
statistics. For example, the Corporate Balance Sheets Statistics were used to trace the
dynamics of firms over the cycle (Döpke and Weber 2006). The Financial Statements
Data Pool was used to exploit the cross-section dimensions to analyze the link between
growth and volatility at the firm level (Buch and Döpke 2007, 2008).
The Financial Statements Data Pool replaces the Corporate Balance Sheets Statistics
of the Deutsche Bundesbank, as the number of corporate annual financial statements
being submitted to the Bundesbank declined after the launch of the European Monetary
Union in 1999 and the subsequent discontinuation of the Bundesbank’s rediscount
business. It has been compiled in a joint project of the Bundesbank and a number of
commercial banks and other financial institutions. The Financial Statements Data Pool
is somewhat broader than the Corporate Balance Sheet Statistics. The firms represented
about three-quarters of the gross value added of the non-financial business sector in
Germany in 2003 (Deutsche Bundesbank 2005). Both data sets can be used for
statistical purposes, but under strict confidentiality on the premises of the Bundesbank
only. The data have been made anonymous, and only Bundesbank staff is allowed to
work with the Financial Statements Data Pool.
The total time series dimension of our new, linked data set covers 35 years (19712005). The unit of observation is the individual firm. Generally, our dataset contains
information on all balance sheet items and financial statements. Since we are interested
in tracking the evolution of a large number of firms over a long time horizon, we

6

retrieve information on firms’ sales, assets, the legal form, the industry, and some key
firm level control variables only. We use the following firm level variables:
o (Real) sales: Like Comin and Phillipon (2005) or Davis et al. (2006), we use real
sales as a proxy for firm level output. For this variable, we have relatively few
data losses owing to incomplete and inconsistent reporting. Developments of sales
and output differ in that the inventory growth and sales growth are imperfectly
correlated. We use sales in order to avoid a possible bias arising from the fact that
we have only balance sheet data on inventories. Lacking information on firm level
prices, we convert nominal variables into real variables by deflating each firm’s
sales with the industry-level price index obtained from the EU KLEMS database
(see www.euklems.net) and taking the difference of the logarithm of real sales.
o Assets: Total assets of firms, deflated with the same price index as firms' sales, are
used as a proxy for the size of firms. The advantage of this measure over size
measures such as the stock of fixed assets, equity capital, or external debt, is that
it is not influenced by differences in the financing structure or the asset structure
of firms. Also, total assets are a stock measure of firm size, which is likely to
fluctuate less over time than sales as a flow measure.
o Inventories: We include the inventory-sales ratio to capture possible effects of
technological changes on the volatility of firms’ sales. This also takes into account
that sales are an imperfect proxy of output if inventories change.
o Leverage: We compute a measure of leverage as a firm’s debt divided by total
equity. Leverage could be one measure of credit market friction. From a
theoretical point of view, we expect that more severe financial friction reduce
growth and increase the volatility of investment (Aghion and Banerjee 2005).
Accordingly, the expected sign of leverage would be negative. 3
Our dataset contains information on about 80,000 firms per year for the 1971-2005
period. The unrestricted dataset has 2.8 million firm-year observations. The average
duration in the panel is about 13 years per firm. Since our empirical method, which will
be explained in more detail below, is partly based on time series regressions for each
3

Note that information on leverage is not available for a number of firms, which reduces the size of our
sample from about 1,750 to 1,450 firms. However, the qualitative results that are reported in the
following also hold for the larger panel.

7

individual firm, we retain only those firms which are present in the dataset for the full
period. This reduces the total number of firms contained in the sample to 1,464 firms or
51,240 firm-year observations.
In the appendix, the distribution of the unrestricted sample (i.e. the unbalanced panel)
by the number of firms and the volume of real sales by industry (Table 1a) and years
(Table 1b) is given. We also provide comparative evidence of the balanced panel.
One particularly interesting feature of our dataset is that it contains information on
manufacturing and services firms. In terms of the volume of sales, services account for
roughly 19% of sales in the balanced panel. The bulk of these sales (13%) is in the
wholesale trade sector. In the unbalanced panel, the largest sector is wholesale trade as
well, accounting for about 24% of total in terms of sales. The share of the wholesale
trade sector is even higher in terms of the number of firms (21% in the unbalanced
panel and 29% in the balanced panel). These numbers are out of proportion to the
importance of this sector for GDP since we refer to sales rather than to value added.
None of the remaining sectors dominates as clearly. As regards the number of firms, the
basic metals sector (11.6%) ranks second, and machinery and equipment (10.7%) ranks
third. In terms of the volume of real sales, the largest sector is petroleum products
(29.6%), followed by transport equipment (15.7%), and wholesale trade (12.7%).
A comparison of the structure of the balanced panel and the unbalanced panel shows
that firms from manufacturing sectors are overrepresented and services firms are
underrepresented in the balanced panel. This is not surprising since the balanced panel
favors firms which had taken part in the Bundesbank’s rediscount business. At the same
time, this makes our findings robust to structural changes (see, e.g., Parker 2007). The
disadvantage, of course, is that the inflow of younger and presumably riskier firms into
the sample as well as the exit of high volatility firms is not captured. In Section 5.3
below, we discuss different sample splits, which take into account that the survivorship
bias might differ across firms of different sectors, size, or legal status. Table 1b shows
the allocation of firms over the years. Here, the selection bias due to our restriction on a
balanced panel is less severe, as we have about 3% of all observations in each year in
both samples.

8

3.2 Computing Firm Level Volatility
As a first step towards computing firm level volatility, we compute firms’ growth
rates as

g it

yit  yit 1
yit 1

(2)

where g it is firm i’s sales growth rate, and yit are firm i’s real sales in t. Since our
data contain no information on reasons for large outliers such as mergers and
acquisitions, we drop observations which fall by more than half or more than double.
The same restriction is applied to the growth rate of assets. Moreover, observations are
excluded if leverage is larger than 100. Table 2a in the appendix shows the descriptive
statistics. The mean firm level growth rate for the full sample is 3.6%, which is slightly
higher than the growth rate of real GDP (2.2%).
As regards the measurement of volatility, it has become relatively standard in the
literature to compute growth volatility as the standard deviation in growth rates over a
moving 5-year or 10-year window (see, e.g., Comin and Phillipon 2006, Davis et al.
2006). The volatility of real sales over a 10-year window is thus defined as:

V

10
it

y

ª1 0
2º
«10 ¦ g i ,t W  g it  »
¬ W 9
¼

1/ 2

(3).

where g it measures the mean growth rate. Correspondingly, the volatility over a 5year window V it5  y  uses observations ranging from t = -4 to t = 0.
Graph 1 (see the appendix) plots the mean, unconditional firm level volatility of sales
growth against the volatility of the growth rate of GDP. The unconditional volatility has
not been corrected for macroeconomic influences. The median standard deviation of
firm level growth is about 12%, which is comparable to evidence found in earlier
studies (Buch et al. 2006, Comin and Phillipon 2005) and 10 times higher than the
volatility of aggregated GDP. Graph 1 shows that the time trends are quite similar and
share two main features. First, there has been a trend decline in volatility over time.
Second, volatility was temporarily higher in the period following German unification in

9

the early 1990s. These general patterns in the data are very similar when using the
unbalanced panel of firms.
The information in Graph 1 alone, however, says little about time trends in the
idiosyncratic volatility of firms’ growth volatility though. We will therefore describe the
methodology, in the following, how we isolate microeconomic factors from
macroeconomic factors affecting firm level volatility.

4 Computing Idiosyncratic Firm Level Volatility
Previous empirical work on the determinants of firm level volatility uses the
volatility of output as given by equation (3) as the dependent variable. Such regressions
suffer from three potential problems. First, by construction, the dependent variable is
serially correlated. Second, the choice of the 5-year or 10-year window for the
computation of volatility is somewhat arbitrary, although it is often used in the
empirical literature. Third, using the unconditional firm level volatility does not allow
distinguishing idiosyncratic, firm level, from macroeconomic factors. The parallel
evolution of firm level and aggregated volatility documented in Graph 1 could be the
result of similar developments at different levels of aggregation, but it could also cloud
diverging patterns at the firm level. Simply including observable macroeconomic
volatilities as regressors may not fully isolate the idiosyncratic component because only
observed factors are included. Also, in a pooled regression, the impact of
macroeconomic factors is assumed to be homogenous across firms.
Hence, in this section, we describe the multifactor residual model recently proposed
by Pesaran (2006). This model allows us to filter observed and unobserved
macroeconomic factors out of the firm level data. It provides us with a measure of the
conditional, idiosyncratic firm level real sales growth. To see the logic of the
multifactor residual model, assume that firm level sales growth is given by
g it

D 'i d t  E 'i xit  H it

(4)

where i 1,2,..., N is the number of firms and t

1,2,..., T the number of years.

D and E are parameters to be estimated. Equation (4) states that firm level growth
depends on a k u 1 vector of observable macroeconomic factors ( d t ) and a vector of

10

observed firm-specific regressors ( xit ). The errors are assumed to have a multifactor
structure:

H it

J 'i f t  u it

(5)

where f t is an m u 1 vector of unobserved macroeconomic factors and uit the
individual-specific (idiosyncratic) errors, which are assumed to be distributed
independently of d t and xit . In Pesaran (2006), the observed and unobserved factors d t
and f t are assumed to be covariance stationary. Generally, the unobserved factors can
be correlated with ( d t , xit ); the individual-specific regressors are modelled according
to:
xit

A'i d t  *'i f t  vit

(6)

where Ai and *i are factor loading matrices and vit those components of xit which
are independent of the macroeconomic factors.
In most applications, the interest is in the slope coefficients E i in equation (4). The
factor loadings D i and J i are not the main interest, but they can be estimated
consistently when both N and T are large. Since our panel has a time series dimension of
T = 35, we can analyze the firm level responses to the macroeconomic factors.
However, our main interest is in the variance of the idiosyncratic term uit . With an
estimate of uit at hand, we can compute the variance of the idiosyncratic component of
firm level growth for each firm i. This variance can be proxied through the variance of
the first-stage residuals:

1 T 2
1 T
ˆ
,
which
converges
to
u

i
V uit T  j 2 .
¦
¦
it  T  j
T 1 j 0
T 1 j 1

(See e.g. Gorbachev (2007) for a similar specification using household consumption
data.)
The key challenge is to isolate developments at the firm level from aggregate
developments while taking into account the fact that some of the macroeconomic
factors affecting all firms alike are unobserved. Hence, we isolate factors which affect
all firms ( d t , f t ) from those firm-specific variables, which are independent from the

11

macroeconomic factors, i.e. the residual of equation (6) ( vit ). We perform this
decomposition in two steps.
In a first step, we run time-series regressions for sales growth of each firm in the
sample on observed and unobserved macroeconomic factors. Following Pesaran (2006),
the unobserved macroeconomic factors can be proxied through the sample means of
firm-specific variables. We therefore take advantage of the fact that the model described
by equations (4)-(6) is quite general as it allows the unobserved common factors f t to
be correlated with the individual-specific regressors xit via a multifactor structure with
heterogeneous factor loadings over the cross-section units. We run these regressions for
each of the firms in our balanced panel and for each of the firm level variables
separately and retain the residuals from these regressions. 4
In a second step, we use the squared residuals from these time series regressions,
which are the growth rates of firm level variables cleaned of the observed and
unobserved factors, in a pooled firm level panel regression:

u it2

D 0  D '1 vit  D ' 2 G i  D '3 G t  D ' 4 G s  D '5 G l  K it

(7)

where uit2 is the squared residual of the first-stage regression of sales growth on
macroeconomic factors, G i , G t , G s , G l are firm-, time-, sector-, and legal fixed effects,
and vit is a set of firm-specific regressors, i.e. the first-stage residuals from equation
(6). We use time fixed effects as a general specification of the time trend as well as a
linear time trend. Note that the time trend also captures the fact that firm level volatility
is related to firm age. Typically, older and more established firms are less volatile than
younger firms. Taken in isolation, this should lead to a negative impact of the time trend
on volatility but, of course, the trend also captures other factors that vary systematically
over time.
To check whether there is a time trend in the variance of the idiosyncratic,
conditional firm level growth rates, we also use graphical as well as regression-based
evidence. We employ equation (3) above and compute the rolling standard deviation of
4

Note that the individual-specific coefficients are consistently estimated. They are also asymptotically
unbiased for N o f for both T fixed and T o f as long as the rank condition concerning the
factor loadings is satisfied (Pesaran 2006).

12

the idiosyncratic volatility. In addition, we use fixed effects panel regressions and the
heteroskedastic regression model suggested by Harvey (1976) to check whether the
squared residuals as a proxy for the idiosyncratic volatility of firm level sales growth
follow a systematic process. Note that the first-stage regressions account for the
observed and unobserved macroeconomic factors in the mean growth of firm level
sales. This does not preclude finding that macroeconomic factors and time trends to
have an impact on the idiosyncratic variance of firm level growth.

5 Decomposing and Explaining Firm Level Volatility
Results for the unconditional volatility of firm level sales growth reported in Graph 1
provide evidence of a decline in firm level volatility, which largely resembles the drop
in macroeconomic volatility. To what extent does this decline in firm level volatility
result from lower volatility at the macro-level and to what extent does it reflect smaller
idiosyncratic volatility? In this section, we report the results of the first- and secondstage regressions described above.
5.1 First-Stage Regression: Decomposing Firm Level Volatility
The goal of the first-stage regressions is to clean the growth of firm level variables of
observed and unobserved macroeconomic factors. Our set of observed macroeconomic
factors includes domestic and foreign as well as price and quantity measures. To capture
the domestic macroeconomic environment, we include the growth rate of domestic
absorption, short-term interest rates, and domestic inflation. To capture the international
macroeconomic environment, we include the annual changes in the real exchange rate,
world demand, and raw material prices. (Details on the data definitions are given in the
Appendix.)
Table 2a in the appendix reports the growth rate of other macroeconomic factors, i.e.
domestic real absorption (mean growth rate of 1.9%), world import volume (4.0%), raw
material prices (6.7%), and the real effective exchange rate of the German economy
against its 23 most important trading partners (-0.1%). An increase in this indicator
implies a real appreciation. The average short-term interest rate and the inflation rate
over this period were 5.7% and 2.7%, respectively.

13

We use four means of firm-specific variables as proxies for unobserved
macroeconomic factors. The mean growth rate of firms’ sales captures structural shifts
in firm level growth. The growth rate of firms’ assets captures changes in the size
structure of firms. The mean inventory-sales ratio captures changes in the importance of
inventories due to technological progress, and mean leverage across firms captures
changing financial frictions. As expected, the inventory-sales ratio shows a downward
trend over time, reflecting improvements in inventory management. Leverage, in
contrast, has been increasing up until the early 1990s and falling thereafter, reflecting
legislative changes affecting the financing of firms in Germany as well as the increase
in stock market valuation during the 1990s.
Table 2b in the appendix shows the correlations between the observed macro-factors
and the unobserved factors. All correlations are below 0.9, and most are below 0.5. We
find the highest correlations between GDP growth and the growth rate of domestic
absorption as well as between some firm level variables. Since domestic absorption is
less correlated with the mean firm level factors than GDP growth, we use domestic
absorption as our domestic demand component. In addition, the changes in the real
exchange rate and in world imports as well as the interest rate and inflation show
relatively high pairwise correlations. The same holds for the mean firm level variables.
However, we include a full set of observed and unobserved macro-factors as these may
still pick up some orthogonal component of the macroeconomic environment.
The advantage of running the first-stage regressions firm-by-firm is that we allow for
the largest possible heterogeneity across firms. At the same time, results of these
regressions are difficult to visualize. Therefore, we regress the firm level coefficients
obtained from the time series regressions on a set of dummy variables. To account for
the fact that the coefficients are measured with uncertainty, we weight these
observations with the inverse of their standard deviation.
The aim of this exercise is to see whether, for instance, large and small firms react
differently to the macroeconomic environment. Results reported in Table 3 (see the
appendix) show some differences in the response of firms to macroeconomic factors.
Generally, larger firms grow faster than smaller firms when domestic and world market
demand increases and the real exchange rate appreciates. Also, an increase in raw

14

materials prices and in the real interest rate increases the growth of large firms relative
to that of small firms. This would be consistent with large firms being oriented more
towards the international market and less affected by financial constraints. Listed firms,
in contrast, do not differ significantly from the rest of the sample. An increase in the
real interest rate lowers growth of firms in the sectors manufacturing, services, and
construction in comparison to growth in the remaining sectors (agriculture, mining,
energy). Higher world import demand increases growth in the manufacturing and
construction sector, while higher raw materials prices lower growth in manufacturing
and services.
To assess the importance of the macroeconomic factors for firm level sales growth,
we also compute the partial R²s for these factors. This partial R² indicates how much a
particular macroeconomic factor contributes to explaining the variance of firm level
sales growth.
On average, the macroeconomic factors individually explain about 5-6% of the
variance in sales growth across firms (Table 2c). However, the explanatory power
varies widely with the highest partial R²s being in the range of 0.45 for domestic
absorption and 0.59 for the real exchange rate. Hence, for some of the firms in the
sample, individual macroeconomic factors explain more than 50% of the variance in
real sales over time.
Generally, the exact specification of the first-stage regressions should not be
overemphasized. Essentially, these regressions serve the purpose of filtering
macroeconomic information out of the firm level time series and to retain the
idiosyncratic component of sales growth. In this sense, they are similar to the mean
equations in an ARCH or GARCH setting, which serve the purpose of providing an
estimate of the variance of the variable at hand.
The most interesting outcome of the first-stage regressions are perhaps the plots of
the residual standard deviations. Graph 2 in the appendix shows the conditional
volatility of firms’ sales growth. As before, we use a 5-year rolling window. There are
two striking observations that immediately meet the eye.
First, the conditional firm level volatility is substantially lower than the
unconditional volatility. During the turbulent 1970s, in particular, macroeconomic

15

factors accounted for more than 50% of the volatility of firm level sales growth. In
subsequent periods, the importance of macroeconomic factors has been less
pronounced, but the gap between the conditional and the unconditional volatility series
was still substantial. Hence, even though the impact of individual macroeconomic
factors on firm level sales growth has, on average, been small, the overall impact of the
macro-economy on firm level developments has been quite substantial.
Second, the downward trend in firm level volatility reported in Graph 1 is not visible
once macroeconomic factors are taken into consideration. Instead, the time profile of
firm level volatility is rather flat and even shows a slight upward trend. In this sense,
our results confirm the conclusion reached by Davis et al. (2006) that (unconditional)
firm level and aggregate volatility can be expected to behave similarly. However, our
findings for the conditional volatility are also consistent with Comin and Phillipon
(2006) who argue that the time trends of aggregate and firm level volatility differ.
5.2 Second-Stage Regressions: Explaining the Volatility of Sales Growth
Which are the firm-specific factors that determine the volatility of growth at the firm
level? Do size and sector effects matter? Do we find support for different hypothesis as
to the causes of the Great Moderation at the firm level? These are questions we will
now turn to.
In Table 4 (see the appendix), we report results of firm level regressions using the
squared residuals of the first-stage regressions as a measure of the volatility of the
conditional firm level growth rates of sales as a dependent variable (cf. equation (7)).
We use fixed-effects panel regressions with robust standard errors. In contrast to the
first-stage regressions, we now estimate homogenous coefficients.
Generally, our model explains less than 5% of the variation in the volatility of sales
growth across firms. In similar (unreported) regressions using the growth rate of firms’
sales as a dependent variable, we obtain higher R²s ranging from 0.13 to 0.19. It does
not come as a surprise to find that the explanatory power of the idiosyncratic, firm level
volatility is relatively low, since we have stripped the variables off macroeconomic
developments and since we consider only the idiosyncratic variation in the data.
Moreover, these results are strongly driven by the very large amount of cross-sectional
heterogeneity, which is typical for large micro-data sets like the one at hand.

16

(Gorbachev (2007), for instance, analyzes the determinants of household-level
consumption risk for the US and reports R²s in a similar range.)
We find a very consistent pattern of sales volatility to be positively related to growth
of total assets. The estimated coefficient is about 0.03, and it is quite robust across
different specifications with regard to other control variables and the inclusion of fixed
effects. Moreover, the impact of asset growth on firm level volatility builds up gradually
over time. We include up to three lags of asset growth, and the first lag is significant
throughout. In terms of economic significance, asset growth is the most important
variable, with a beta coefficient of 8%. Hence, variation in sales growth across firms
accounts for about 8% in the variation of volatility across firms.
The finding that faster-growing firms also have more volatile sales growth is
consistent with earlier findings at the firm level or industry level concerning the growthvolatility nexus. It is at odds with some findings for a negative relationship between
growth and volatility using aggregated data. However, it would not come as a surprise
to find that the growth rates of firms are imperfectly correlated. Imbs (2007), for
example, shows that the correlation between growth and volatility depends on the level
of aggregation of the data. He finds a positive correlation between growth and volatility
at the industry level. One explanation is that growth rates are imperfectly correlated
across sectors. Our firm level data suggest a similar positive relationship.
Firms with a high inventory-sales ratio have a low volatility of real sales. The beta
coefficient is –1.3%. Leverage as a measure of the financial constraints that firms are
facing is insignificant, in contrast. At first sight, the negative coefficient on inventories
seems at odds with the hypothesis that improved inventory management helps firms to
reduce the volatility of sales. According to this explanation, technological innovations
help firms to reduce the desired inventory-sales ratio. A lower inventory-sales ratio, in
turn, would weaken the destabilizing, pro-cyclical impact that inventories have for final
sales via a positive covariance between inventories and sales (Ramey and Vine 2004).
Our results would be consistent though with inventories serving as a buffer against
productivity shocks. According to this interpretation, higher inventory-sales ratios
would smoothen the impact of volatile production on sales.

17

Generally, however, standard models of inventory management often fail to find
support in the macro-data. Prominent theories such as the production smoothing model
(Holt et al. 1960) predict a negative correlation between inventory investment and
overall production, which was not found in the data. (See Blinder (1986) and the
literature cited therein.) Rather, most macro studies find a positive correlation between
inventory investment and GDP. Possible explanations of these findings point, inter alia,
to the fact that inventories are still treated at a too aggregated level. In particular, a
distinction between inventories of inputs and the inventories of finished goods is
warranted. However, we lack such information in our dataset.
To test whether there are time trends in firm level volatility, we include a time trend
and a unification dummy. The unification dummy and the time trend are insignificant if
lagged dynamics are accounted for. This shows that our macroeconomic factors have
filtered out impacts of the unification process on firm level volatility. The time trend is
significant but relatively small, thus indicating only a relatively slow increase in
volatility. Moreover, the beta coefficient is only 0.26%. In contrast to unconditional
firm level volatility and aggregated volatility, the idiosyncratic volatility of firms has
thus been on a slow trend rise.
In unreported regressions, we include a full set of time-fixed effects as a more
flexible way to capture time trends in the data. Results for the remaining control
variables are unchanged. We also interact the time trend with a dummy variable for
listed firms to test the hypothesis put forward by Davis et al. (2006) that firm level
volatility has increased because of an upward trend in the volatility of large, publicly
listed firms. However, this interaction term is insignificant.
5.3 Robustness and Selection Issues
To check the robustness of our results, we split the sample along different
dimensions, we use a heteroskedastic regression model to simultaneously model the
mean and the variance of idiosyncratic sales growth, and we correct for the bias arising
from the fact that we estimate our model on a reduced sample of firms.
Sample splits: The descriptive statistics reported in Tables 1a and 1b show
differences between the full and the reduced sample. Hence, sample selection may
affect our results since only firms which have data for the full sample are included. This

18

sample selection could affect our results if the residuals from the regression of the
determinants of firm level output volatility were correlated with residuals from a latent
regression determining the survival of firms. These survival probabilities, in turn, may
be related to firm size, the sector in which firms are active, or access to the capital
market. To account for such differences, we split the sample into manufacturing and
services, listed and unlisted, and small and large firms (Table 4a). The cut-off for small
and large firms is the median level of real sales. To test whether time trends in firm
level volatility have changed over time, we break down the sample further into the
1970s, the 1980s, the 1990s, and the current decade (Table 4b). We also split the sample
in 1985, the year which is often taken as the start of the Great Moderation period.
Perhaps the most interesting finding is that the qualitative results for the control
variables are generally not affected by the different sample compositions. There are a
few exceptions though. In the 1970s, none of our control variables is significant.
Instead, there has been a positive and significant upward time trend in firm level
volatility. Moreover, the inventory-sales ratio is insignificant for the sub-samples of
listed firms (although the negative sign is retained). Inventories have a negative and
significant effect for services firms, which would seem surprising for services which are
non-storable. However, since the sector “services” also includes retail and wholesale
trade firms and since these firms carry inventories, this effect seems quite plausible.
Selection bias: In unreported regressions, we have also estimated the volatility
regression applying the correction for sample selection proposed by Heckman (1976).
The selection equation shows that large firms, firms with lower sales growth, and firms
with lower leverage are more likely to be in the balanced panel. The Mills ratio is
significant, indicating that sample selection is indeed an issue. Results for the equation
explaining the volatility of firm level output show very similar results with regard to the
coefficient estimates and significance as regressions not accounting for the selection
bias. More specifically, firms that grow faster, that have a higher inventory sales ratio,
and that have lower leverage have a lower volatility. The linear time trend is again
positive and significant.
Heteroskedastic regression model: To check the robustness of our results for the
variance equation, we alternatively use a regression model with multiplicative

19

heteroskedasticity as proposed by Harvey (1976). The advantage of this model is that
we can simultaneously specify a “mean” equation – explaining the growth of sales – as
well as a “variance” equation – explaining the residual variance.
The heteroskedastic regression model has, to the best of our knowledge, not been
applied to an analysis of firm level volatility so far. Earlier applications use it to model
heteroskedasticity in the residuals, yet most papers do not focus on estimates of the
variance equation. There are two exceptions. A recent paper by Cerqueiro et al. (2007)
studies banks’ loan pricing decisions. Ang and Peterson (1985) estimate a capital asset
pricing model and study the determinants of rates of returns as well as the variance of
returns.
The mean equation of the heteroskedastic regression model gives the level of sales
growth as a function of a set of explanatory variables X: g~it ~
x 'it E  H it where H it is
the residual with E >H it | ~
xit @ 0 and VAR>H it | ~
xit @ V it2
equation is given by V it2

exp^Z 'ij I ` . The variance

Z 'it I . The coefficients E and I can be obtained by

maximizing the log-likelihood function. One advantage of this methodology is that the
parameters of the mean and of the variance equation are uncorrelated. We essentially
estimate the same model as before but we now include dummies for the different types
of firms (large versus small, listed versus unlisted) in lieu of a full set of firm fixed
effects.
Results are reported in Table 5 (see the appendix). Turning to the results of the mean
equation first, we find that asset growth is positively correlated with the growth rate of
firm level sales. There is evidence that larger firms grow faster than average. Large
inventory-sales ratios are associated with lower sales growth, indicating that inventories
contain mainly finished products. Since the specification of the mean equation is
certainly a bit ad hoc, we also use a specification using a linear time trend and the
unification dummy only.
The results for the variance equation by and large confirm the findings reported
above considering the positive impact of higher asset growth and the positive impact of
the time trend. The firm size dummy is negative and significant. The negative impact of

20

the inventory-sales ratio is significant only in the specification using a very lean
specification of the mean equation (Column 2 of Table 5).

6 Summary and Conclusions
This paper has tested whether evidence of a “Great Moderation” can be found in firm
level data of German firms. To answer this question, we have used a unique firm level
dataset which allows a large sample of German firms to be tracked across 35 years. Our
paper has three main findings.
First, the unconditional firm level volatility and aggregate volatility have developed
quite similarly. This confirms Davis et al. (2006) who use US data and differs from the
findings of Comin and Phillipon (2005) who find diverging trends of firm level and
aggregated volatility.
Second, we show that inference about the evolution of firm level volatility requires
us to take account of macroeconomic factors. Using the multifactor panel model
proposed by Pesaran (2006), we have decomposed firm level sales growth and volatility
into the idiosyncratic component and the component driven by observed and
unobserved macroeconomic developments. Results from this disaggregation show that
the overall time trends in unconditional firm level volatility are driven by
macroeconomic factors. Once we take this into account and extract the idiosyncratic
component of firm level volatility, we not only find volatility to be lower but also to
exhibit a flat and, if anything, slightly increasing pattern.
Third, we use different panel models to analyze the determinants of the idiosyncratic
component of firm level volatility. Faster-growing firms also exhibit a higher volatility
of real sales growth. In this sense, higher idiosyncratic volatility could have a positive
impact on overall growth and thus economic welfare. If anything, the time trend in firm
level volatility has been positive. However, the time trend explains only a very small
share of the variation in idiosyncratic volatility across firms and time.
Our results show the importance of a stable macroeconomic environment for firm
level stability. High macroeconomic volatility such as was observed during the 1970s
has roughly doubled firm level volatility. In later periods, the decline in firm level
volatility was driven largely by the decline in macroeconomic volatility. To the extent

21

that “Good Policy” is behind the decline in aggregate volatility, this has also contributed
to lower volatility at the firm level. Idiosyncratic, firm level volatility exhibits no
particular time trend. Studying whether similar patterns can be found in other indicators
such as the volatility of employment, income, and consumption, remains an important
topic for future research.
Finally, our paper has implications for the potential to diversify risks across German
firms. Whereas a substantial part of volatility at the firm level is driven by common
macroeconomic factors, which limits the diversification potential across domestic firms,
the relative importance of idiosyncratic risks has increased over time. These risks,
however, can be diversified in developed financial markets.

7 References
Aghion, P., and A. Banerjee (2005). Volatility and Growth. Oxford University Press.
Oxford.
Ang, J.S., and D.R. Peterson (1985). Return, Risk, and Yield: Evidence from Ex Ante
Data. Journal of Finance 40(2): 537-548.
Aßmann, C., J. Hogrefe, and R. Liesenfeld (2006). The Decline in German Output
Volatility: A Baysian Analysis. Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel. Working
Paper 2006-02. Kiel.
Benati, L. (2007). The “Great Moderation” in the United Kingdom. European Central
Bank. Working Paper 769. Frankfurt a.M.
Benati, L., and P. Surico (2006). VAR Analysis and the Great Moderation: A Reply to
Fabio Canova. Bank of England. Mimeo.
Blanchard, O.J. and Simon, J.A. (2001). The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output
Volatility. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 165-173.
Blinder, A. S. (1986). Can the Production Smoothing Model of Inventory Behaviour be
Saved? Quarterly Journal of Economics: 431-453.
Buch, C.M., and J. Döpke (2007). Growth and Volatility: Firm level Evidence and the
Impact of Openness. In: W. Franz, H. J. Ramser, and M. Stadler: Arbeitsverträge
Buch, C.M., and J. Döpke (2008). Growth, Volatility, and Credit Market Imperfections:
Evidence from German Firms. Journal of Economic Studies (forthcoming)

22

Buch, C.M., J. Döpke, and C. Pierdzioch (2004). Business Cycle Volatility in Germany.
German Economic Review 5(4): 451-479.
Buch, C.M., J. Döpke, and H. Strotmann (2006). Does Export Openness Increase Firm
level Volatility? Deutsche Bundesbank. Discussion Paper 40/2006. Frankfurt a.M.
Canova, F. (2006). You can use VAR for structural analyses. A comment to VARs and
the Great Moderation. ICREA, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, CREI and CEPR.
Mimeo.
Cerqueiro, G., H. Degryse, and S. Ongena (2007). Rules versus Discretion in Loan Rate
Setting. CentER Tilburg University. Mimeo.
Comin, D., and S. Mulani (2006). Diverging Trends in Aggregate and Firm Volatility.
Review of Economics and Statistics 88(2): 374-383.
Comin, D., and T. Philippon (2005). The rise in firm level volatility: causes and
consequences. National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER Working Paper
11388. Cambridge MA.
Comin, D., E.L. Groshen, and B. Rabin (2006). Turbulent Firms, Turbulent Wages?
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Working Paper 12032.
Cambridge, MA.
Davis, S.J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2006). Volatility and Dispersion
in Business Growth Rates: Public Traded versus Privately Held Firms. National
Bureau of Economic Research. NBER Working Paper 12354. Cambridge MA.
Davis, S.J., and J.A. Kahn (2007). Changes in the Volatility of Economic Activity at the
Macro and Micro Levels. University of Chicago, Stern School, and NBER.
Mimeo.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2005). German enterprises” profitability and financing – an
analysis based on a new dataset. Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report. Frankfurt
a.M.. October 2005: 31-67.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2006). Extrapolated results from financial statements of German
enterprises 1994 to 2003. Deutsche Bundesbank Special Statistical Publication 5.
Frankfut a. M. March 2006: 5-19.
Döpke, J. and S. Weber (2006), The within-distribution business cycle dynamics of
German firms. Deutsche Bundesbank. Discussion Paper 29/2006. Frankurt a.M.
Eichengreen, B. (2007). The European Economy since 1945: Coordinated Capitalism
and Beyond. Princeton University Press.

23

Giannone, D., M. Lenza, and L. Reichlin (2007). Explaining The Great Moderation: It
Is Not The Shocks. CEPR Discussion Paper 6600. London.
Gorbachev, O. (2007). Did Household Consumption Become More Volatile?
Department of Economics, Columbia University. Mimeo.
Harvey, A. (1976). Estimating Regression
Heteroskedasticity. Econometrica 44: 461-465.

Models

with

Multiplicative

Heckman, J. (1976). The common structure of statistical models of truncation, sample
selection, and limited dependent variables and a simple estimator for such models.
Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 5: 475-492.
Holt, C. et al. (1960). Planning production, inventories, and workforce. Engelwood
Cliffs.
Hornstein, A. (1998). Inventory Investment and the Business Cycle. Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond. Economic Quarterly 84/2: 49-71.
Imbs, J. (2007). Growth and Volatility. Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (2007)
1848-1862.
Parker, M. (2007). Diverging Trends in Aggregate and Firm–Level Volatility in the UK.
Bank of England. External MPC Unit. Discussion Paper 16. London.
Pesaran, M.H. (2006). Estimation and Inference in Large Heterogeneous Panels with
Multifactor Error Structure. Econometrica 74(4): 967-1012.
Rodrik, D. (1997). Has Globalization Gone Too Far? Institute for International
Economics, Washington D.C. 51.
Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (2003). Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence and
Explanations. Harvard University, Princeton University, and NBER. Mimeo
Thesmar, D., and M. Thoenig (2004). Financial Market Development and the Rise in
Firm Level Uncertainty. ENSAE-CREST, CERAS-CNRS, and CEPR. Mimeo.

24

8 Data Appendix
Firm Level Data
All firm level data are taken from the Corporate Balance Sheet Statistics and the
Financial Statements Data Pool provided by the Deutsche Bundesbank (Deutsche
Bundesbank 2005). The data are confidential firm level data, and the Financial
Statements Data Pool can be used by the staff of the Deutsche Bundesbank only.
Sales growth: Annual growth rate of a firm’s real sales.
Asset growth: Annual growth rate of a firm’s total real assets.
Inventory-sales-ratio: Ratio of a firm’s inventory over total sales.
Large/small firms: Firms with real sales above (below) the sample median.
Leverage: Ratio of a firm’s total debt to total equity.
Listed/unlisted firms: Incorporated (not incorporated) companies (Aktiengesellschaften).
Manufacturing firms: Chemicals, Basic metals, Machinery, Transport equipment,
Electrical equipment, Wood, Pulp and paper, Textiles, Food, Computers, Non-metallic
mineral products, Plastic products, Petroleum products, Furniture.
Services firms: Wholesale trade, Hotels, Transport & communication, Financial
intermediation, Real estate, Public services, Retail trade, Firm-related services.

Macroeconomic Data and Sources
GDP growth: Annual growth rate of German real GDP (German Federal Statistical
Office).
Growth rate of domestic absorption: Annual growth rate of German real absorption
(German Federal Statistical Office).
Growth rate of world imports: Annual growth rate of world import volumes
(International Monetary Fund).
Change in real exchange rate: Annual rate of change in Germany’s real effective
exchange rate against 23 countries in quantity notation. An increase indicates a real
appreciation (European Central Bank).
Change in raw material prices: Annual rate of change in the HWWA index of raw
material prices (overall index).
Short-term interest rate: Average short-term interest rate (3 months, Frankfurt money
market rate; Deutsche Bundesbank).

25

Table 1: Distribution of Firms by Sector and Year
This table gives the distribution of firms in the sample by sector (Table 1a) and year (Table 1b). We
report the distribution of the number of firms and of the volume of real sales (in million euro). The
balanced panel includes all firms; the unbalanced panel includes only firms which are in the sample for
the full period.

(a) Distribution of Firms by Sector

Agriculture
Basic Metals
Chemicals
Computers
Construction
Electrical equipment
Energy
Financial intermediation
Firm related services
Food
Furniture
Hotels
Machinery
Mining
Non-metallic
mineral products
Petroleum products
Plastic products
Public services
Pulp and paper
Real estate
Retail trade
Textiles
Transport
& communication
Transport equipment
Wholesale trade
Wood
Unallocated
Total

Number of firms
Unbalanced
Balanced
Number Percent Number Percent
75,905
2.66
70
0.14
162,012
5.67
5,922
11.56
32,498
1.14
2,119
4.14
4,315
0.15
24
0.05
256,831
8.99
1,710
3.34
84,587
2.96
1,995
3.89
17,316
0.61
997
1.95
2,037
0.07
n.a.
n.a.
141,704
4.96
126
0.25
90,483
3.17
2,993
5.84
28,801
1.01
633
1.24
n.a.
n.a.
19,952
0.7
152,390
5.34
5,498
10.73
23,341
0.82
443
0.86

Real sales
Unbalanced
Balanced
Mil. euro Percent Mil. euro Percent
136.96
0.2
5.21
0.04
3715.76
5.5
554.64
4.72
3007.83
4.45
709.93
6.04
467.71
0.69
7.72
0.07
2257.61
3.34
176.54
1.5
3339.02
4.94
530.11
4.51
2805.73
4.15
389.37
3.31
79.72
0.12
n.a.
n.a.
1171.98
1.73
2.71
0.02
3416.93
5.06
307.85
2.62
306.31
0.45
20.42
0.17
84.67
0.13
n.a
n.a.
3846.20
5.69
473.37
4.03
826.85
1.22
267.23
2.27

48,739
1,728
56,767
64,973
72,340
184,257
432,062
92,461

1.71
0.06
1.99
2.27
2.53
6.45
15.13
3.24

1,712
209
1,312
62
1,844
137
2,872
3,238

3.34
0.41
2.56
0.12
3.6
0.27
5.6
6.32

783.03
6217.74
1080.94
837.19
1406.65
1187.24
5688.73
1174.39

1.16
9.2
1.6
1.24
2.08
1.76
8.42
1.74

147.25
3479.59
186.90
15.74
154.83
4.69
571.69
133.50

1.25
29.6
1.59
0.13
1.32
0.04
4.86
1.14

107,160
22,795
590,360
78,183
12,009
2,856,006

3.75
0.8
20.67
2.74
0.42
100

458
862
14,965
1,019
20
51,240

0.89
1.68
29.21
1.99
0.04
100

2302.19
4733.33
16031.16
656.98

3.41
7.01
23.73
0.97

239.76
1848.69
1498.17
30.29

2.04
15.73
12.74
0.26

67562.86

100

11756.18

100

26

(b) Distribution of Firms by Year

Year
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Total

Number of firms
Unbalanced
Balanced
Number Percent Number Percent
47,081
1.65
1,464
2.86
47,649
1.67
1,464
2.86
47,983
1.68
1,464
2.86
50,057
1.75
1,464
2.86
61,034
2.14
1,464
2.86
70,758
2.48
1,464
2.86
78,006
2.73
1,464
2.86
84,658
2.96
1,464
2.86
87,734
3.07
1,464
2.86
83,461
2.92
1,464
2.86
77,945
2.73
1,464
2.86
78,270
2.74
1,464
2.86
79,905
2.8
1,464
2.86
80,632
2.82
1,464
2.86
79,846
2.8
1,464
2.86
79,273
2.78
1,464
2.86
78,328
2.74
1,464
2.86
76,000
2.66
1,464
2.86
73,296
2.57
1,464
2.86
71,734
2.51
1,464
2.86
72,123
2.53
1,464
2.86
71,819
2.51
1,464
2.86
71,246
2.49
1,464
2.86
71,651
2.51
1,464
2.86
68,442
2.4
1,464
2.86
66,430
2.33
1,464
2.86
104,157
3.65
1,464
2.86
97,194
3.4
1,464
2.86
98,674
3.45
1,464
2.86
100,916
3.53
1,464
2.86
106,080
3.71
1,464
2.86
111,348
3.9
1,464
2.86
123,129
4.31
1,464
2.86
134,397
4.71
1,464
2.86
124,750
4.37
1,464
2.86
2,856,007
100
51,240
100

27

Real sales
Unbalanced
Mil. euro
Percent
1126.02
1.67
1211.66
1.79
1235.05
1.83
1338.98
1.98
1389.46
2.06
1547.38
2.29
1643.88
2.43
1588.63
2.35
1694.85
2.51
1714.93
2.54
1809.99
2.68
1783.21
2.64
1775.05
2.63
1859.23
2.75
1866.91
2.76
1707.83
2.53
1819.53
2.69
1861.77
2.76
1947.44
2.88
2032.62
3.01
2112.71
3.13
1862.75
2.76
1715.33
2.54
1839.71
2.72
1887.40
2.79
1789.63
2.65
2329.22
3.45
2154.85
3.19
2297.06
3.4
2605.32
3.86
2761.53
4.09
2699.09
3.99
2735.96
4.05
2850.51
4.22
2967.38
4.39
67562.86
100

Balanced
Mil. euro
Percent
237.63
2.02
274.21
2.33
236.49
2.01
251.58
2.14
275.13
2.34
297.35
2.53
345.54
2.94
302.41
2.57
313.94
2.67
313.84
2.67
347.65
2.96
357.54
3.04
350.66
2.98
379.22
3.23
378.69
3.22
328.64
2.8
423.13
3.6
408.70
3.48
467.55
3.98
480.62
4.09
461.08
3.92
324.80
2.76
283.22
2.41
283.91
2.41
278.82
2.37
229.48
1.95
333.35
2.84
288.02
2.45
301.90
2.57
333.83
2.84
345.94
2.94
338.89
2.88
351.22
2.99
406.53
3.46
424.69
3.61
11756.18
100

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics and Correlation Matrix
This table reports descriptive statistics for the data used in the regressions. Panel (c) provides the
descriptive statistics for the partial R²s.

(a) Descriptive Statistics
Variable
GDP growth
Growth rate of domestic absorption
Growth rate of world imports
Change in real exchange rate
Change in raw material prices
Short-term interest rate
Inflation
Mean firm level growth real sales
Mean firm level growth of assets
Mean inventory-sales ratio
Mean leverage
Growth rate of firm level real sales
Growth rate of firm level assets
Inventory-sales ratio
Leverage
Residual growth firm level real sales
Residual growth firm level assets
Residual inventory-sales ratio
Residual leverage

Obs
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183
49,183

Mean
0.022
0.019
0.040
-0.001
0.067
0.057
0.028
0.036
0.037
0.162
6.835
0.036
0.037
0.162
6.836
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

28

Std. dev.
0.017
0.021
0.113
0.048
0.239
0.027
0.019
0.043
0.037
0.007
0.866
0.162
0.172
0.147
9.663
0.121
0.134
0.053
4.074

Min
-0.009
-0.022
-0.211
-0.099
-0.474
0.021
-0.007
-0.067
-0.045
0.147
5.365
-0.498
-0.499
0.000
-0.052
-0.763
-0.836
-1.327
-44.065

Max
0.052
0.052
0.305
0.113
0.943
0.121
0.073
0.157
0.107
0.173
8.428
1.950
1.892
7.970
99.931
1.566
1.612
3.109
66.140

29

Change in raw
material prices
Short-term
interest rate
Inflation
Mean firm level
growth in real
sales
Mean firm level
growth in assets
Mean inventorysales ratio
Mean leverage

Growth rate of
world imports
Change in real
exchange rate

GDP growth
Growth rate of
domestic
absorption

1.00

-0.1934

-0.0319
0.0467

0.5927
0.6261
0.0448
0.0179

0.185
0.0692

0.7958

0.7329

0.1043
-0.0629

0.241

0.1004

0.0604

-0.2373

1.00

Growth rate
of domestic
absorption

0.0218

0.8431

GDP
growth

(b) Correlation Matrix

0.0551
0.2551

0.3318

0.2383

0.013

0.3447

-0.7115

1.00

Growth rate
of world
imports

-0.2241
-0.0115

-0.2735

-0.1727

0.0469
0.2075

-0.3028

1.00

Change in
real
exchange
rate

0.0427
-0.189

0.2887

0.415

0.2413
0.2064

1.00

Change in
raw
material
prices

0.6296
-0.101

-0.1098

0.0562

1.00
0.7664

Short-term
interest rate

0.511
-0.4194

-0.1615

0.0353

1.00

Inflation

0.0767
-0.2212

0.8729

1.00

Mean firm
level
growth in
real sales

-0.0178
-0.0147

1.00

Mean firm
level
growth in
assets

1.00
-0.1517

Mean
inventorysales ratio

(c) Descriptive Statistics: Partial R²
Observations

Mean

Standard
deviation

Minimum

Maximum

Domestic
absorption

56,179

0.054

0.069

0.00

0.453

World imports

56,179

0.057

0.074

0.00

0.519

Real exchange
rate

56,179

0.076

0.094

0.00

0.595

Raw material
prices

56,179

0.053

0.073

0.00

0.579

Short-term
interest rate

56,179

0.048

0.066

0.00

0.549

Inflation

56,179

0.061

0.079

0.00

0.507

30

Table 3: Firm Level Response to Macroeconomic Factors
The panel reports results of cross-section regressions using the first-stage coefficient estimates as the
dependent variable. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the first-stage regression standard errors.
The sectors not captured by the sector dummies are agriculture, energy, and mining. All regressions
include a full set of legal fixed effects (unreported). The explanatory variables are 0-1-dummy variables.
Residuals are adjusted for heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * = significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%-level.
Domestic
absorption
Large (0/1)
Listed (0/1)
Manufacturing (0/1)
Services (0/1)
Construction (0/1)
Constant
Observations
R-squared

0.233*
(1.67)
0.421
(0.84)
-0.277
(0.77)
-0.569
(1.50)
1.048
(1.41)
-0.075
(0.13)
1,446
0.02

World
import
demand

Real
exchange
rate

0.055**
(2.45)
-0.004
(0.04)
0.105**
(2.55)
0.029
(0.64)
0.195*
(1.84)
-0.095
(0.86)
1,446
0.02

0.105**
(2.06)
-0.111
(0.51)
-0.005
(0.04)
0.029
(0.21)
0.029
(0.12)
-0.045
(0.19)
1,446
0.01

31

Raw
material
prices
0.018**
(2.26)
0.012
(0.30)
-0.037*
(1.88)
-0.071***
(3.39)
-0.034
(0.79)
0.023
(0.52)
1,446
0.03

Short-term
interest rate
0.220**
(2.23)
0.629*
(1.73)
-0.639***
(2.91)
-0.520**
(2.24)
-1.303***
(2.88)
0.071
(0.18)
1,446
0.02

Inflation
-0.302*
(1.89)
-0.828
(1.23)
1.235***
(4.62)
0.856***
(2.92)
3.016***
(4.15)
-0.212
(0.31)
1,446
0.03

Table 4: Determinants of Firm Level Volatility of Real Sales
This table reports results of panel fixed effects regressions. The dependent variable is the squared residual
of a regression of firm level real sales growth on macroeconomic factors. Asset growth, the inventorysales ratio, and leverage are residuals of first-stage regressions as well. “Year” is a linear time trend,
“Unification” dummy is a dummy variable which is set to “One” for the years 1991-1995 and “Zero”
otherwise. ***, **, * = significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%-level.

(a) Baseline Regressions and Sample Splits by Type of Firm
Full
sample
Asset growth
0.036***
(6.01)
Asset growth (t-1)
0.016***
(4.82)
Asset growth (t-2)
0.002
(0.62)
Asset growth (t-3)
-0.002
(0.99)
Inventory-sales ratio
-0.073***
(3.76)
0.00
Leverage
(0.74)
0.00
Unification
(0.31)
Year
0.000**
(2.05)
Constant
-0.142**
(2.13)
Sector dummies
yes
Legal dummies
yes
Year dummies
no
Observations
43,799
Number of cross-sections
1,464
R-squared
0.02

Manufacturing Services
Listed
Unlisted
Small
Large
0.028*** 0.045*** 0.110*** 0.028*** 0.027*** 0.048***
(3.32)
(5.16)
(2.66)
(5.70)
(4.28)
(4.34)
0.014*** 0.011*** 0.040*** 0.013*** 0.012*** 0.021***
(3.03)
(2.78)
(2.70)
(4.08)
(3.45)
(3.47)
0.002
0.003
0.024
0.00
0.002
0.001
(0.36)
(1.02)
(1.37)
(0.16)
(0.86)
(0.22)
-0.004
0.004
0.00
-0.002
-0.003
-0.002
(1.17)
(1.45)
(0.03)
(1.25)
(0.94)
(0.56)
-0.061** -0.072***
-0.062 -0.075*** -0.071*** -0.076**
(1.98)
(3.34)
(1.30)
(3.54)
(3.90)
(2.42)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
(0.54)
(0.34)
(0.41)
(0.48)
(0.78)
(0.17)
0.00
0.00 -0.003*
0.001
0.00
0.00
(0.11)
(0.08)
(1.79)
(0.78)
(0.10)
(0.29)
0.00
0.00 0.000**
0.00
0.00 0.000**
(1.12)
(1.15)
(2.46)
(1.20)
(0.55)
(1.96)
-0.032
-0.109 -0.673**
-0.067
0.015
-0.145
(0.43)
(1.11)
(2.59)
(1.06)
(0.20)
(1.34)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
no
no
no
25,291
15,550
4,857
38,942
21,930
21,869
884
579
212
1337
731
733
0.01
0.03
0.06
0.02
0.02
0.02

32

(b) Sample Splits by Time

Asset growth
Asset growth (t-1)
Asset growth (t-2)
Asset growth (t-3)
Inventory-sales ratio
Leverage

1970s
0.001
(0.08)
0.012
(1.39)
0.002
(0.25)
-0.002
(0.46)
-0.002
(0.09)
0.00
(0.30)

1980s
0.033***
(2.77)
0.027***
(3.76)
0.003
(0.43)
-0.002
(0.31)
-0.085**
(2.21)
0.00
(0.51)

0.001***
(3.79)
-2.002***
(3.73)
yes
yes
no
7,088
1,459
0.02

0.00
(0.30)
-0.102
(0.29)
yes
yes
no
14,245
1,461
0.03

Unification
Year
Constant
Sector dummies
Legal dummies
Year dummies
Observations
Number of cross-sections
R-squared

33

1990s
0.050***
(4.35)
0.016***
(2.69)
0.004
(0.76)
-0.002
(0.37)
-0.125
(1.63)
0.00
(0.21)
0.005***
(3.80)
0.001***
(4.15)
-1.710***
(4.15)
yes
yes
no
14,097
1,461
0.05

2000s
0.049***
(4.07)
0.009*
(1.80)
0.005
(1.00)
0.00
(0.06)
-0.048
(0.85)
0.00
(1.54)

0.001**
(2.12)
-1.122**
(2.01)
yes
yes
no
8,369
1,453
0.03

Pre-1985 Post-1985
0.018** 0.045***
(2.15)
(5.74)
0.025*** 0.014***
(3.78)
(3.73)
0.003
0.002
(0.84)
(0.67)
-0.004
-0.001
(0.91)
(0.45)
-0.089**
-0.080*
(2.05)
(1.88)
0.00
0.00
(0.37)
(0.47)
0.00
(0.34)
0.001***
0.00
(3.13)
(1.28)
-1.135***
-0.128
(3.11)
(1.18)
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
14,221
29,578
1,462
1,464
0.02
0.03

Table 5: Regression Results Heteroskedastic Regression Model
This table reports results of the heteroskedastic regression model proposed by Harvey (1976). The
dependent variable is the mean firm level volatility of sales for firms in each sector. Year is a linear time
trend, Unification dummy is a dummy variable which is set to “One” for the years 1991-1995 and “Zero”
otherwise. ***, **, * = significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%-level.
Mean equation
Asset growth (t)
Asset growth (t–1)
Asset growth (t–2)
Listed (0/1)
Inventory–sales ratio (%)
Leverage
Large (0/1)
Manufacturing (0/1)
Services (0/1)
Construction (0/1)
Year
Unification (0/1)
Variance equation
Asset growth (t)
Asset growth (t–1)
Asset growth (t–2)
Listed (0/1)
Inventory–sales ratio (%)
Leverage
Large (0/1)
Manufacturing (0/1)
Services (0/1)
Construction (0/1)
Year
Unification

34

(1)

(2)

0.32***
(51.24)
0.09***
(18.55)
–0.02***
(–3.53)
–0.0004
(–0.26)
–0.46***
(–11.52)
–0.00
(–0.98)
0.001
(1.22)
–0.001
(–0.57)
–0.001
(–0.39)
0.005
(0.73)
–0.00
(–0.08)
–0.001
(–0.08)

–0.00
(–0.69)
0.00
(0.09)

0.86***
(8.22)
0.57***
(5.38)
0.15
(1.44)
0.13**
(2.17)
0.23
(1.03)

1.01***
(9.32)
0.50***
(4.64)
0.08
(0.78)
0.08
(1.42)
–0.95***
(–4.66)

–0.18***
(–5.77)
–0.03
(–0.42)
0.001
(0.01)
1.32***
(11.52)
0.001
(0.97)
–0.05
(–0.90)

–0.14***
(–5.10)
–0.02
(–0.30)
0.04
(0.49)
1.25***
(11.75)
0.003*
(1.98)
–0.04
(–0.85)

Graph 1: Unconditional Firm Level Versus Aggregated Volatility
Unconditional firm level output volatility is the median volatility of firm level sales growth over a fiveyear window. Aggregated output volatility is the corresponding volatility of GDP growth.

.08

.005

.01
.015
.02
S.d. of GDP growth (5 yrs)

Unconditional volatility (5 yrs.)
.09
.1
.11
.12

.13

.025

Firm-level versus aggregated 5-year volatility

1970

1980

1990
years

Unconditional volatility (5 yrs.)

35

2000

2010

S.d. of GDP growth (5 yrs)

Graph 2: Conditional Versus Unconditional Firm Level Volatility
Unconditional firm level output volatility is the median volatility of firm level sales growth over a fiveyear window. Conditional firm level output volatility is the corresponding volatility of the residual sales
growth using the method proposed by Pesaran (2006) to control for macroeconomic developments.

.06

.08

.1

.12

Idiosyncratic versus unconditional 5-year firm-level volatility

1970

1980

1990
years

Idiosyncratic volatility (5 yrs.)

36

2000

2010

Unconditional volatility (5 yrs.)

The following Discussion Papers have been published since 2007:
Series 1: Economic Studies
01

2007

The effect of FDI on job separation

Sascha O. Becker
Marc-Andreas Mündler

02

2007

Threshold dynamics of short-term interest rates:
empirical evidence and implications for the
Theofanis Archontakis
term structure
Wolfgang Lemke

03

2007

Price setting in the euro area:
some stylised facts from individual
producer price data

Dias, Dossche, Gautier
Hernando, Sabbatini
Stahl, Vermeulen

04

2007

Unemployment and employment protection
in a unionized economy with search frictions

Nikolai Stähler

05

2007

End-user order flow and exchange rate dynamics S. Reitz, M. A. Schmidt
M. P. Taylor

06

2007

Money-based interest rate rules:
lessons from German data

C. Gerberding
F. Seitz, A. Worms

07

2007

Moral hazard and bail-out in fiscal federations:
evidence for the German Länder

Kirsten H. Heppke-Falk
Guntram B. Wolff

08

2007

An assessment of the trends in international
price competitiveness among EMU countries

Christoph Fischer

Reconsidering the role of monetary indicators
for euro area inflation from a Bayesian
perspective using group inclusion probabilities

Michael Scharnagl
Christian Schumacher

09

10

2007

2007

A note on the coefficient of determination in
Jeong-Ryeol Kurz-Kim
regression models with infinite-variance variables Mico Loretan

37

11

2007

Exchange rate dynamics in a target zone a heterogeneous expectations approach

Christian Bauer
Paul De Grauwe, Stefan Reitz

12

2007

Money and housing evidence for the euro area and the US

Claus Greiber
Ralph Setzer

13

2007

An affine macro-finance term structure model
for the euro area

Wolfgang Lemke

14

2007

Does anticipation of government spending matter? Jörn Tenhofen
Evidence from an expectation augmented VAR Guntram B. Wolff

15

2007

On-the-job search and the cyclical dynamics
of the labor market

Michael Krause
Thomas Lubik

16

2007

Heterogeneous expectations, learning and
European inflation dynamics

Anke Weber

17

2007

Does intra-firm bargaining matter for
business cycle dynamics?

Michael Krause
Thomas Lubik

18

2007

Uncertainty about perceived inflation target
and monetary policy

Kosuke Aoki
Takeshi Kimura

19

2007

The rationality and reliability of expectations
reported by British households: micro evidence James Mitchell
from the British household panel survey
Martin Weale

20

2007

Money in monetary policy design under
uncertainty: the Two-Pillar Phillips Curve
versus ECB-style cross-checking

21

2007

Günter W. Beck
Volker Wieland

Corporate marginal tax rate, tax loss carryforwards
and investment functions – empirical analysis
using a large German panel data set
Fred Ramb

38

22

2007

Volatile multinationals? Evidence from the
labor demand of German firms

Claudia M. Buch
Alexander Lipponer

23

2007

International investment positions and
Michael Binder
exchange rate dynamics: a dynamic panel analysis Christian J. Offermanns

24

2007

Testing for contemporary fiscal policy discretion
with real time data

Ulf von Kalckreuth
Guntram B. Wolff

25

2007

Quantifying risk and uncertainty
in macroeconomic forecasts

Malte Knüppel
Karl-Heinz Tödter

26

2007

Taxing deficits to restrain government
spending and foster capital accumulation

Nikolai Stähler

27

2007

Spill-over effects of monetary policy – a progress
report on interest rate convergence in Europe
Michael Flad

28

2007

The timing and magnitude of exchange rate
overshooting

29

2007

The timeless perspective vs. discretion: theory and
monetary policy implications for an open economy Alfred V. Guender

30

2007

International cooperation on innovation: empirical Pedro Faria
evidence for German and Portuguese firms
Tobias Schmidt

31

2007

Simple interest rate rules with a role for money

M. Scharnagl
C. Gerberding, F. Seitz

32

2007

Does Benford’s law hold in economic
research and forecasting?

Stefan Günnel
Karl-Heinz Tödter

33

2007

The welfare effects of inflation:
a cost-benefit perspective

Karl-Heinz Tödter
Bernhard Manzke

39

Hoffmann
Sondergaard, Westelius

34

2007

Factor-MIDAS for now- and forecasting with
ragged-edge data: a model comparison for
German GDP

Massimiliano Marcellino
Christian Schumacher

35

2007

Monetary policy and core inflation

Michele Lenza

01

2008

Can capacity constraints explain
asymmetries of the business cycle?

Malte Knüppel

Communication, decision-making and the
optimal degree of transparency of monetary
policy committees

Anke Weber

02

2008

03

2008

The impact of thin-capitalization rules on
Buettner, Overesch
multinationals’ financing and investment decisions Schreiber, Wamser

04

2008

Comparing the DSGE model with the factor model:
an out-of-sample forecasting experiment
Mu-Chun Wang

05

2008

Financial markets and the current account –
emerging Europe versus emerging Asia

Sabine Herrmann
Adalbert Winkler

06

2008

The German sub-national government bond
market: evolution, yields and liquidity

Alexander Schulz
Guntram B. Wolff

07

2008

Integration of financial markets and national
price levels: the role of exchange rate volatility

Mathias Hoffmann
Peter Tillmann

08

2008

Business cycle evidence on firm entry

Vivien Lewis

09

2008

Panel estimation of state dependent adjustment
when the target is unobserved

Ulf von Kalckreuth

Nonlinear oil price dynamics –
a tale of heterogeneous speculators?

Stefan Reitz
Ulf Slopek

10

2008

40

11

2008

Financing constraints, firm level adjustment
of capital and aggregate implications

Ulf von Kalckreuth

12

2008

Sovereign bond market integration:
the euro, trading platforms and globalization

Alexander Schulz
Guntram B. Wolff

13

2008

Great moderation at the firm level?
Unconditional versus conditional output
volatility

Claudia M. Buch
Jörg Döpke
Kerstin Stahn

41

Series 2: Banking and Financial Studies
01

2007

Granularity adjustment for Basel II

Michael B. Gordy
Eva Lütkebohmert

02

2007

Efficient, profitable and safe banking:
an oxymoron? Evidence from a panel
VAR approach

Michael Koetter
Daniel Porath

03

2007

Slippery slopes of stress: ordered failure
events in German banking

Thomas Kick
Michael Koetter

04

2007

Open-end real estate funds in Germany –
genesis and crisis

C. E. Bannier
F. Fecht, M. Tyrell

05

2007

Diversification and the banks’
risk-return-characteristics – evidence from
loan portfolios of German banks

A. Behr, A. Kamp
C. Memmel, A. Pfingsten

06

2007

How do banks adjust their capital ratios?
Evidence from Germany

Christoph Memmel
Peter Raupach

07

2007

Modelling dynamic portfolio risk using
risk drivers of elliptical processes

Rafael Schmidt
Christian Schmieder

08

2007

Time-varying contributions by the corporate bond
and CDS markets to credit risk price discovery Niko Dötz

09

2007

Banking consolidation and small business
finance – empirical evidence for Germany

K. Marsch, C. Schmieder
K. Forster-van Aerssen

10

2007

The quality of banking and regional growth

Hasan, Koetter, Wedow

11

2007

Welfare effects of financial integration

Fecht, Grüner, Hartmann

12

2007

The marketability of bank assets and managerial Falko Fecht
rents: implications for financial stability
Wolf Wagner

42

13

2007

Asset correlations and credit portfolio risk –
an empirical analysis

K. Düllmann, M. Scheicher
C. Schmieder

14

2007

Relationship lending – empirical evidence
for Germany

C. Memmel
C. Schmieder, I. Stein

15

2007

Creditor concentration: an empirical investigation S. Ongena, G.Tümer-Alkan
N. von Westernhagen

16

2007

Endogenous credit derivatives and bank behaviour Thilo Pausch

17

2007

Profitability of Western European banking
systems: panel evidence on structural and
cyclical determinants

Rainer Beckmann

18

2007

Estimating probabilities of default with
support vector machines

W. K. Härdle
R. A. Moro, D. Schäfer

01

2008

Analyzing the interest rate risk of banks
using time series of accounting-based data:
evidence from Germany

O. Entrop, C. Memmel
M. Wilkens, A. Zeisler

02

2008

Bank mergers and the dynamics of
deposit interest rates

Ben R. Craig
Valeriya Dinger

03

2008

Monetary policy and bank distress:
an integrated micro-macro approach

F. de Graeve
T. Kick, M. Koetter

04

2008

Estimating asset correlations from stock prices K. Düllmann
or default rates – which method is superior?
J. Küll, M. Kunisch

05

2008

Rollover risk in commercial paper markets
and firms’ debt maturity choice

Felix Thierfelder

The success of bank mergers revisited –
an assessment based on a matching strategy

Andreas Behr
Frank Heid

06

2008

43

07

2008

Which interest rate scenario is the worst one for
a bank? Evidence from a tracking bank approach
for German savings and cooperative banks

Christoph Memmel

08

2008

Market conditions, default risk and
credit spreads

Dragon Yongjun Tang
Hong Yan

09

2008

The pricing of correlated default risk:
evidence from the credit derivatives market

Nikola Tarashev
Haibin Zhu

10

2008

Determinants of European banks’
engagement in loan securitization

Christina E. Bannier
Dennis N. Hänsel

11

2008

Interaction of market and credit risk: an analysis Klaus Böcker
of inter-risk correlation and risk aggregation
Martin Hillebrand

12

2008

A value at risk analysis of credit default swaps B. Raunig, M. Scheicher

13

2008

Systemic bank risk in Brazil: an assessment of
correlated market, credit, sovereign and interbank risk in an environment with stochastic
Theodore M. Barnhill, Jr.
volatilities and correlations
Marcos Rietti Souto

14

2008

Regulatory capital for market and credit risk inter- T. Breuer, M. Jandačka
action: is current regulation always conservative? K. Rheinberger, M. Summer

15

2008

The implications of latent technology regimes
for competition and efficiency in banking

Michael Koetter
Tigran Poghosyan

16

2008

The impact of downward rating momentum
on credit portfolio risk

André Güttler
Peter Raupach

44

Visiting researcher at the Deutsche Bundesbank

The Deutsche Bundesbank in Frankfurt is looking for a visiting researcher. Among others
under certain conditions visiting researchers have access to a wide range of data in the
Bundesbank. They include micro data on firms and banks not available in the public.
Visitors should prepare a research project during their stay at the Bundesbank. Candidates
must hold a PhD and be engaged in the field of either macroeconomics and monetary
economics, financial markets or international economics. Proposed research projects
should be from these fields. The visiting term will be from 3 to 6 months. Salary is
commensurate with experience.
Applicants are requested to send a CV, copies of recent papers, letters of reference and a
proposal for a research project to:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Personalabteilung
Wilhelm-Epstein-Str. 14
60431 Frankfurt
GERMANY

45

